Today.
Um, so we are here as part
of our role supporting the Minister
of Local Government's Oversight, the Dog Control Act.
Um, so I'll make some brief comments on the dog population
and the matters rights by the petition,
and happy to take questions after.
Um, the regulatory framework for dogs in New Zealand is,
is relatively fragmented.
Um, we have the Department of Internal Affairs
and the Dog Control Act.
You have NPI in the animal welfare space.
And then the day-to-day application
and enforcement of dog control sits with the councils.
Um, and we, we certainly acknowledge
and recognize that, uh,
there's been an increase in the dog population, um,
particularly, uh, problematic dogs, roaming dogs,
and that councils are facing a number
of challenges responding to this.
And they work very hard every day, um, trying to,
you know, keep communities safe.
Um, and look, the issue of mandating desing
with acknowledge
that desex more dogs would likely be quite helpful in
managing the dog population.
Um, but there are several challenges with mandating desex.
So I'll just touch on a couple.
Um, if you're gonna mandate desex
and you're likely to need, uh, an exemption criteria and,
and determining what that might be.
And then a system for recording and registering breeders
or people with an exemption.
Uh, dogs are private property
and for many Kiwis, they're beloved family members.
Uh, well for many dog owners,
D six Center is the right choice.
There are a range of reasons
for may not wish to new to their dogs.
Um, I'll note the New Zealand Veterinary Association
submission to you outlined a number of medical factors
that might be considered, uh,
introducing further regulation of dog ownership.
Um, specifically breeding would also have some implications
as to who may be able to access or afford dog ownership.
Uh, the cost to desex might be a
barrier for many households.
Um, and then the resulting fines
with penalties may also cause a number of issues
and might not necessarily assist with compliance.
Uh, breeder licensing in particular would likely require
monitoring and oversight, which, um, would go
beyond council's core responsibility, dog control,
and would likely require welfare lens to be applied.
Um, so you'd need to consider an appropriate agency
and resourcing to, uh, carry out that role.
Uh, secondly, uh,
there would be challenges around enforcement.
As I noted, dog controls already a really challenging space
working, uh, almost half
of New Zealand's registered dog population is entire.
There's also a significant unregistered dog population.
And, uh, it is likely that this, uh, group population has,
uh, even lower rates of desex.
Um, there is a potential
for significant resource demand on councils if they were
required to enforce desex.
Um, so you can imagine, uh, would, would
that look like an active and proactive enforcement?
And, and how would councils be able to resource
that when already dog controllers are pretty strict space?
Um, it's also not clear if the veterinary workforce would be
in a position to support a significant increase in demand.
Um, finally the department agrees that the act,
the Dog Control Act, is increasingly not fit for purpose
and addressing the needs of our dog population.
Councils and communities require a comprehensive review.
At this time, the government has no plans to amend the act.
However, in the meantime,
our department is working on some non-regulatory
improvements in partnership with the sector.
And this will also include information gathering
that could assist reform in the future.
Um, I think that some
of the previous submissions have talked about a lot
of different numbers,
and it's really clear that this conversation would benefit
from, um, some more data, um, so that we really have a,
an accurate picture of what we are looking at.
Yeah, so I'll leave it there
and happy to take any questions.
Yeah.
Alright. Questions members?
Um, members I missed, Joe.
Yeah, I have, I have several,
but is the, um, I wonder if the,
if the coun the council online
and they heard that. Did they?
Yes. Uh, have we got Auckland Council online?
They're, well, I'll tell you what we might do then
that we might hear the Auckland Council
and then we can actually, you remain here and they're online
and we'll address the questions together.
Sometimes that can be more effective way and
That that'd be brilliant.
'cause it's just, that's nearly all of the questions
that I would wanna ask are, are things
that they raised in their written position.
So yeah, so
We'll bring them out, they ready?
And then we'll just have it as a, give ourselves more time
for general discussion afterwards.
Mr. Chair,
Good afternoon, Mr.
Irvine. Is it,
Uh, good afternoon.
Thank you for having me.
Hopefully you can hear me and see me.
Oh, we've got, uh, Ms as well. Great. Okay.
Now we're just, um, in the middle
of our submissions on this, your petitions committee.
Um, we've just heard from, um, our DIA, um,
and then, so we'll, um,
what we're gonna do is we'll hear from you guys
and then we'll have a general discussion including them,
because a lot of the matters will be,
uh, pertinent to both groups.
So, um, 10 minutes is yours and, uh, but take as much time
and then, uh, leave plenty of time for questions, please.
Well, thank you for having us.
I guess I'll just introduce myself first.
So I'm the general manager of licensing
and compliance at all Council.
Also have Ellie Online who is the manager of,
of animal management for Auckland Council.
So I'll take, um, I'll just start with I guess a few points.
I'll take, I guess the document as read that we submitted,
but I do want to, I guess, highlight some key points.
Um, as you must probably fully aware
and seen through a lot of the media, the,
the issues facing Auckland in terms
of dog control is unprecedented.
We've seen some significant increases year on year across,
I guess, key things like roaming the amount of roaming dogs,
and particularly in certain areas across Auckland,
that is obviously having a really direct impact on things
like increases in attacks across our, all
of our public spaces and quite a significant impact on our
vulnerable community.
So, you know, we have direct, um, relationships with the,
the likes of, um, the Bright
and Low Vision Society, New Zealand Bar
and Low Vision Society.
Been working with, um, ministry of Education.
And I'm having a lot of issues where, you know,
we're having kids that are worried to walk to school.
We are having, um, vulnerable communities such
as the low vision community who are unable
to have guide dogs in certain areas just due
to their unprecedented, um, issues facing Auckland terms
of the roaming dog.
Um, Auckland is, um, one
of the key things in this space is really around the level
of unknown dogs and entire dogs.
So the dogs that aren't desexed.
And we are seeing that, you know, significantly
through the amount of dogs that we impounding, um, of sort
of the 10,000 dogs.
A very big chunk of those are unregistered, unknown
and also entire that are coming through.
So again, we're seeing those are the problem dogs
that are roaming that aren't Dex
Auckland has taken a big step towards actually trying
to tackle this issue.
And we've thrown a lot of resource.
So just recently in this last financial year,
we've increased our resourcing by $5.9 million
to tackle some of these issues.
And again, that's throwing a lot
of additional compliance staff at it,
increasing our shelter capacity,
and also looking at things around
how we actually improve things like our education.
We've pushed very hard on a strong message out there in
terms of responsible dog ownership and the need,
and we use the media as a key outlet in terms of how
to get that message across.
The big thing for us is trying to ship the behavior of a lot
of our irresponsible dog owners
that I'm getting their dogs d it's not looking after them
and not caring for them.
The other things that we are pushing hard
is that compliance space.
So we're taking a strong stance in terms of making sure
that registrations and examples include over the last, um,
year, we've moved our infringements from circus 6,000
to 17,000.
And again, that's pushing hard around trying to, um,
curve effectively the non-compliance in the dog space.
Um, we're also looking at tackling the,
the dog population itself.
And a really key thing for us is that we've taken steps
around things like insourcing
and in housing a veterinary service.
So that's something new that council stepped into.
We don't believe it's our core business,
but we feel it's fundamental in terms of what we need to do
to control the dog population.
So we've actually employed a veterinary, um, um,
nurse surgeon
and all that to start undertaking some of the procedures,
and that's now working really successful.
We've also partnered with the likes of SBCA
around voucher systems to increase the amount
of 3D sexing across the region for those that individuals
that can't afford to do it.
Um, we're also looking at things like expanding our shelter
capacity and we know we need to be doing that
because we are not seeing the changes in the numbers.
So again, there's a big piece of work
that we've got underway to increase our level
of shelter capacity.
And again, that's just another step that we're trying to do
to throw some of the resource at it.
Um, we have obviously spoken around changes to legislation
and we do need to look at our powers, um, and to support us.
And that again, is just one avenue.
So, you know, try to solve this problem.
We feel it's not just one silver bullet, it's really trying
to tackle it from a multiple avenues.
And we're trying to tackle this from every sort of
avenue we can to get on top of the problem.
So when we saw this, um, the petition come through, um,
we felt it was important that we obviously submit
and we are actually putting our support to the submission.
Look, we do note, and we, um,
heard Kate's, um, comments earlier.
We do note there are complexities
around mandatory des sexing.
We know obviously there's the cost barrier.
We know there's the veterinary, um,
um, resourcing issues.
We know how you do it is gonna be hard
and also there's a whole lot raft of other complexities.
But we do believe where we're at in terms
of the challenges facing Auckland
and potentially the rest of the country,
that it's actually a really important thing
that we look at it now, at the moment.
Right. Thank you. A a question,
obviously the you can't do it by bylaw is not,
you've obviously looked at that and you don't have the, um,
the power to do this to be, um, central government
that the gold, it could only be done in the dog control act.
Yes, correct. Yeah. I just step in there.
It's just the, the issue that we have
with the bylaw is it's only an infringing offense.
So if you know you an infringement,
there's no seizure power behind it.
And we've found that with other bylaws
that we've implemented, they, they kind of lack teeth
and the problem has become so significant in Auckland.
I know Rob was talking about our impounds,
but if you think, you know, 10,214 dogs
and pounded last year, huge numbers.
Our shelters are fully, you know, continuously at capacity
and even if we were to build onto them every single year,
we would not be able to keep up at this rate
because only 12% of those dogs that came
through were desexed.
And we see that with the, the numbers that the dog attack
increase that we've had since COVID 2020,
that they've gone up 82%.
We nearly had 3000 dog attacks reported to us last year,
but our known dog population has only increased by 17%.
So it's quite clear that this unknown
entire dog population is growing up in a,
I guess an exponential rate.
So what we are expecting, if there's not some
pretty major intervention at this time yeah,
that it will snowball and snowball out of control
and we'll get to the point where we're really struggling
to keep walking to safe.
So yeah.
Given we're talking about possible legislation
or changes to the act, um, would just to get some focus
to this basic deal, would any change need
to focus on empowering individual TLAs
or would you see it would, is that
where any legislation change should be directed?
Um, well, and there is over suggesting either, eh, yeah,
Yeah, yeah. So,
correct. Um, yeah, I guess we look at it,
we need a change, I guess as our, our our,
our starting point, whether that's at a,
at a more local level,
empowering councils set their own policies
or at a national level, we are sort of, um, oblivious.
All right. Um, you know, I think that we recognize
that some councils are different
and we know that, um, that the challenges facing some
of the councils and the complexities
of implementing something like this will be more challenging
for some of the smaller councils.
So that's why we're looking at, at, at
that option around local.
But again, if it was done at a national level,
there are benefits in terms of that consistency.
So we can see benefits on both.
Alright. Well I'll ask you the question
and I'll ask DIA, that is the act fit
for purpose from your point of pur point of view.
Look, I think the act is, um, it's 30 years old.
Um, it needs to be revisited, it needs to be looked at.
There's a range of things in there that need to be, I guess,
refined changed, and I think desex, ING's just one
of those aspects that needs to be incorporated as part
of the, a review on it,
I think. Got some,
sorry.
No, you go Ellie.
I was just gonna add, and I mean the act,
it needs a complete overhaul.
I mean, we look at it and it really is a reactive piece of,
um, legislation.
It allows councils to react
to once an issue has happened once a dog attacks occurred,
once a dog's been roaming,
but there's nothing in there that enables councils
to be proactive at keeping the public safe in terms
of desex fencing requirements.
It needs a complete overhaul in, in our view.
And DIA, I mean, I know you're in a difficult position,
but from, would you, as far as you're allowed
and for your own observation
and discussions you've been in, is it fit for purpose?
Yeah, I mean, I think we've, we've said earlier
that it is dated
and so that it, it is unlikely to meet the needs
of the communities and councils today and
therefore require, as I say,
a comprehensive review across a number issues.
What are that two quite powerful
positions both taken, sorry,
Sorry, I, I appre appreciate, um,
your representatives in, in Auckland.
Um, do you talk to, um, some
of your other colleagues around the country?
Are we seeing this across, across New Zealand
or is this an Auckland specific explosion, um,
in adult population,
Not through local government New Zealand, presumably.
Now
Look, um, you know, we haven't reached out formally
to engage across, um, the various other councils.
Um, I guess, you know,
what we are fully aware from other media reports
and conversation that we're seeing similar issues across in
Northland and across other areas.
Um, you know, again, what we look at as, you know, we
seeing major issues facing Auckland.
So a lot of our focus
and attention has been looking at the sheer size
and number of, of roaming dogs request for services
that we have and, and how to respond to that in Auckland.
Certainly there is a lot
of interest from the New Zealand Institute
of Animal Management for, um, reform of the Dog Control Act.
I've just come back from the conference.
I'm also on the executive for the northern branch.
And so there are, depending on the different TAs,
because they're so different in size
and their, um, individual needs,
but there are, uh, pockets of issues I think across all
of our, our, our councils.
So particularly up north, um, see what's happening up there
and the struggle that they're finding with roaming dogs
and the dog population just getting out of control.
We haven't actually heard from that organization.
Um, that sounds like, so this was on the conference,
this was a reasonably decent agenda item, was it
In our a GM rather?
Not so much in the conference that's put on more
for the sort of frontline staff around training
and that sort of thing, but certainly the New Zealand
Institute, um, except the contactable.
Oh, that's, that's useful. Actually,
Can I just, um, no, just one of the, um, concerns
that DIA, um, Kate raised was, uh, around the resourcing.
It's interesting, um, Robert, you're saying Aland council.
Yeah. I mean obviously there's more
and more, uh, being invested in this space and resourcing.
Do you think it would be fair to say
that if it was mandated, um, that in Auckland Council's,
um, case that they'd now have a law that they'd have to be,
be fulfilling, um, uh, that,
that there'd be the willingness within the council to
allocate the yet further resources that,
that are gonna be required to, to, um, to, to
to provide even more d sexing and law enforcement?
Yeah, I think if we, I mean,
way we've gotta look at it's one obviously gotta be very
mindful of how you implement something like this.
Mm-hmm. And, you know, one
of the options would be a phased implementation.
And we need to obviously look into that in more, do
I think I'm gonna flip it, I guess the other way around.
If we don't do something about it, the level of resourcing
and demand on
that is just gonna exponentially keep on growing.
So, you know, for us it's really around let's get ahead
of the curve, let's actually, um, solve it now,
otherwise we're gonna throw a resource at it
or we're gonna have to throw more resource at it anyway.
And, you know, I guess more importantly, you know, the risk
of attacks and harm
to the public is just gonna keep on increasing.
Okay. Alright. Thank you.
And just, can I also just clarify, um, just you,
you said this, there is no both written in,
both you've written and oral, you emphasize that there's no
on the, there's um, whilst you guys acknowledge
that the act is potentially not for, for current purpose,
there's no work planned, uh, in terms of reviewing it? Not
In terms of me just live.
Yeah. Okay, cool.
Um, well I'm the, uh, MP for, which includes Panama Road.
Mm-hmm. Um, which is, um, uh, infamous, uh, in this area
of our problems with dogs. So yeah.
Alright, With that message from the sponsor.
We'll, uh, thank you. Now, um, both,
it's excellent presentations.
Very much good to We will, we will, what
what we'll do from here is obviously, um,
there's something needs to be done.
That's by the sounds of it,
and we'll hear from the institute too.
We'll get them along to get their view.
So thanks very much Tes.
Well thank you for your time. Thank you.
You thank you.
Right. We'll move on to item five.
Denise wearing rugby jersey.
Good afternoon. Pass your colleagues on the way out.
Yes, indeed. We you could have come in and sat
and listened for them Don thing.
Alright, look, welcome.
Um, thanks very much, uh, probably busy time for you
around the, this, this, this particular time,
so appreciate your time here.
So look, we've read your, um, submissions,
but we'd be good to sort of speak to them
and give some time for questions.
So thank you. Sure.
Um, Koto, uh, my name's Amanda.
I'm a principal policy analyst at the
Department of Criminal Affairs
And kda. My name's Ryan Burns,
I'm a policy member.
I'm Greg O'Connor, chair of committee,
Greg Fleming and Hamish Campbell with
MP r Gilbert.
Um, thanks for the opportunity to present today.
Um, as you may have seen in our submission, uh, the
DA's role in the local electoral system is, is, um, is
that we are responsible for the regulatory stewardship
of the legislation.
Uh, and as part of that, we maintain relationships with, um,
the various parties that are involved in the
delivery of the elections.
But it's the councils themselves that deliver the elections.
Uh, they also appoint a, uh, independent electoral officer
to run the elections
and they also contract election service provider companies,
um, to deliver the, the, uh, those,
and it's those companies that do
amongst other things the vote processing and counting.
Um, so this means that we'll do our best today
to answer your questions if you have them.
Um, but if they stray into the operational type space,
then we might have to go away
and talk to other people to get more information.
Mm-hmm. Um,
so I guess the key points from our submission, just
to summarize it at the beginning, would be to say
that we think it would be worthwhile to look at the role
of scrutinous in the context of local elections.
Um, we don't think it's as simple
as just copying the electoral Act process
for parliamentary elections across, uh, largely
because of the differences in the timeframes
for when vote processing
and counting is done for the two types of elections.
But I'll explain that a little bit more, um,
and that we haven't seen evidence to suggest
that there's a problem here
that would require urgent detention,
but as I say, we agree, it's probably some an area
that's worth looking at.
Um, so, uh, if shall I carry on
and summarize this mission?
So, um, from, I'm moving to sort of paragraphs nine
to 12 here of our written submission.
The, um, under the local Electoral Act, uh,
vote processing involves taking the vote out
of the envelope, uh, checking its validity
and recording it, recording what the vote is ready
for counting for postal voting.
This process can be done up to 32 and a half days
before the close of polling, um, and also
after the close of polling.
Uh, and then moving on to paragraph 13
of our submission, scrutinies can be present for processing
that takes place after the close of polling.
Um, a justice
of the piece must always be present when any vote processing
is done and the justice of the piece provides a certificate
to say that they are satisfied
that the regulatory requirements were complied with.
So those are the key components of the legislation itself.
Um, in our submission from paragraphs 18 to 24,
we've given you a general overview of
how the vote processing is done.
Um, and we've done this using information
provided by the two companies.
So essentially votes are processed,
encountered in two processing processing centers,
one in Auckland and one in Christchurch.
The envelopes are opened, the papers are scanned
to mark off the role and check for any irregularities in
how the paper has been filled out.
The scan votes are not counted or totaled until
after the close of polling.
Uh, and when that happens, it's just an automated process
and it occurs very quickly.
So this means that there's very limited opportunity
for scrutinies to observe the vote, uh, processing
and counting because the process is highly automated.
Much of the processing is done
before the scrutinies are allowed in the room,
and the steps
that are completed when they are
allowed in the room are so quick.
Um, and then if you compare that
with parliamentary elections, the petitioner has proposed
that scrutinies should be able
to observe early processing similar to what occurs
for parliamentary elections.
And so at paragraphs 25 to 27, we briefly summarize,
uh, what the legislation, legislation says
for parliamentary elections.
The key difference is that no processing
or counting is done for parliamentary elections
until the morning of, um, election day.
Um, and then both processes are done together.
They start doing the, the processing and the counting,
or they can, um, with the ability for scrutinize scrutinous
to observe that process.
It's conducted in a restricted area with entry obviously,
and exit control by the returning officer.
So those factors minimize the risk
that information about the voting trends can be
used to influence voting.
That's still underway because it's just on that morning.
Um, at paragraphs 28 to 30 of our, uh,
submission, we note that, um,
scrutiny provisions aren't an issue
that has come up very much, uh, for the department.
We had a, we had a bit of a trawl around
and we found that there were a small number
of comments made in select committee inquiries
after local elections.
And we've outlined that in our submission just
so you have the information from previous submissions.
Um, but it's not an area that the department has looked into
or done any real policy analysis on.
Um, lastly, from paragraph 31 onwards,
in our submission, we've highlighted some of the wider
considerations that we think are important when thinking
about further work on this issue.
Uh, the first is that obviously independent scrutiny
of some sort of elections is very important.
There are good reasons for that.
The second is that the current provisions seem to aim
to balance independent oversight by using the,
having the JP there, um, with the integrity of the election.
So minimizing the risk that, um,
information about votes already cast is used
to influence voting.
That's still underway.
And, um, our last, the last thing we think is that, um,
advances in technology have reduced the ability
for scrutineers to observe processes to a point
where it's quite, quite minimal, their ability
to observe processes.
So therefore, uh, we do think it, it may be worthwhile
for the role of scrutineers to be reviewed,
but our suggestion is that it should be looked at as part
of the end-to-end process, looking at scrutiny of the role
processing, counting and recounts
and thinking about that process as a whole and,
and what, um, scrutiny, uh, checks
and balances you have through that process.
So that is in summary, our submission
and open to any questions that you might have.
Alright. Members, I mean, the reality of it is,
it's the, the nature it is,
there's almost very little comparator.
Mm. With the way the national election. Mm-hmm.
In the past when these local body elections were conducted,
they, when they were poll, you know,
with the polling booths Mm.
Were there scru, I mean,
how long since we've had polling booths and local bodies?
I mean, I, I seem to remember myself voting local
body elections. Um,
So it changed to postal voting really in 1989.
89. This has been one instance
of booth voting in 1992.
Um, but I'm, I'm afraid I'm not that familiar.
There's no where no, no councils anywhere,
no TLAs anywhere have, um,
Not, not since 1992.
Right. Okay. No councils have used, um, booth anything.
So under, under the legislation
and the regulations, councils have a choice of
how to conduct their elections.
Um, since 1989, postal has been an option.
Booth has also remained an option, um, since
that time no council has used booth voting since 1992.
And of course we can anticipate
that we're probably gonna go
to electronic voting at some stage.
Um, of, um, it's, it's probably, I mean,
I know I've said on reviews where currently the,
it's just not the con the yeah.
Confidence and integrity of the system market,
but presumably we'll get there one day,
in which case there will be no time there,
there'll be no ability for Cru at all. Mm-hmm.
Yeah, I mean it's, it's not something
we're working on at the moment.
Uh, it may not be that far away.
Probably there's lots of Gen Xs out there and either two Gen
XI dunno what generation, um,
so I suppose the petitioner has, um,
disagrees with the JP saying it's not a
representative of of the party.
Um, what, what's your view to that
and do you think that there's any, any role for if,
um, appreciate what you're saying is in the processing, um,
of these votes, um, but then it happens very quickly, um,
but potentially, um, if,
if a chunk of votes aren't being counted or maybe discarded
or through kind of, um, nefarious means
by someone in the process, do, do you think
that then the petitioner has a right to be concerned?
Sorry, it's probably a bit of a rambling, rambling.
I, I guess we would say we haven't seen any evidence
of a problem, which is not to say that there isn't the,
the best check that is available on that is
that there are periodically judicial recounts of, um,
local elections.
We do keep an eye on those to see if they're,
they're showing up problems in the processes.
Um, and there's nothing
that has caused us particular concern coming out
of judicial recounts.
Um, I I mean I,
yeah, I I don't know what
I, I think we could say we don't have a departmental view
under the scope party question on the question of whether,
um, there's value in adding a scrutiny into
that process and reprocessing period.
Um, this isn't something that we've done policy work on.
Um, our submission explains the role of the justice
of the piece, um, within the process
as it stands at the moment.
Um, we're not saying that
that's equivalent to the role of the scrutiny.
Absolutely not saying that they, um,
they'd achieved different things.
And I think the petitioner in his supplementary, um,
submission, um, teases out some
of the points about the difference between a
jp, um, and a scrutiny.
So I think, as Amanda said,
we think there could be value in looking at what the role
of the scrutiny would be in that process.
Um, we don't have a department view
Having, having observed elections in Papua New Guinea
and Fiji, one of the biggest issues there was loss of, um,
of, of ballot boxes going missing.
That's not anything a scrutiny would, um,
would be an issue with anyway.
'cause they, they wouldn't, wouldn't know that wouldn,
That's A whole different issue.
Alright. Well any other No, that's, that's useful actually.
Yeah, we put some, I mean really would it,
okay here, if we were to recommend that Scru is,
um, be part of the system, would it make a lot more work for
those who are conducting the elections?
What would it be?
I, I mean I think that's something we would have to work
through as
Part of the, just just take example this you,
because we, Wellington, this had come and was in place
and I'm just thinking out loud
and would it be creating a lot more work, um,
for, well those con well those conducting the election,
I can't think that it would be,
Yeah, we would, we would have
to consult on how they manage that.
Um, obviously at the moment they do have processes
to enable the jps to observe that process.
Um, but I, yeah, I, with, without having worked
through actually what's involved
and with people who are responsible for the operations,
it couldn't give you a confident answer that,
That there'll be a review of the local body election.
There always is. Um, there would justice committee do it?
That'd be a good question. But then actually that process.
Alright, well look, um, looks like no more questions.
So thank you very much. Thank, very helpful.
Can't think of anyone else.